---
permalink: '/working-in-the-lab-part-1/'
title: "Working in the Lab, Part 1"
authors: [ealvarado]
projects: []
date: 2016-12-07
teaser: |
  On my first day of work, I looked up the term “operationalize” in the dictionary. A mixture of curiosity and sheer pragmatism led me to do this; after all, the project I was about to embark on aimed to “operationalize time.”
---

On my first day of work, I looked up the term "operationalize" in the dictionary. A mixture of curiosity and sheer pragmatism led me to do this; after all, the project I was about to embark on aimed to "operationalize time." More specifically, the ultimate goal was to create a computer program that might track the progression of time in fiction (that is, in novels and short stories). I thought it wise to have at least *some* sense of what this actually entailed. To my utter dismay, however, what I found online was not of much help. According to *Merriam-Webster*, the transitive verb means "to make operational." (Boy, was that instructive!) I did learn a fun, random fact, though: in terms of popularity, "operationalize" is in the bottom 30% of searched words. Filled with both frustration and excitement, I decided to heed my project leader's advice and read a Literary Lab pamphlet written by English professor (and Lit Lab founder), Franco Moretti. His fifteen-page paper, titled "'Operationalizing': or, the function of measurement in modern literary theory," clarified my doubts tremendously. (Also, an important lesson was learned: *always* follow older and smarter people's advice.) Here is the general gist:

> "Operationalizing means building a bridge from concepts to measurement, and then to the world. In our case: from the concepts of literary theory, through some form of quantification, to literary texts." (Moretti, 1)
>
> "Taking a concept, and transforming it into a series of operations." (Moretti, 2)

Armed with a better understanding of "operationalize," I was ready to start tagging my first work of fiction. I read Ernest Hemingway's "The Killers." This is an excellent story, but before I dive into the process of tracing its advancement of time, allow me to restate, in more detailed terms, the look and feel of my research. The process is fairly straightforward: choose a novel or short story. Break it up into discrete scenes (e.g. a conversation between two characters would be separate from the description of a house). It helps to imagine what a film adaptation of the given fictional piece might look like---that is, what set of actions would constitute a single shot or a related series of them. Lastly, ascribe a time duration to every single scene, in units of minutes. Alright, now back to Hemingway. I am extremely glad his story was the first one I got to tag; the experience proved to be quite enjoyable. The narrative was linear, meaning there were no unexpected flashbacks or flash-forwards to consider. In other words, I could easily partition the tale into standalone scenes. In order to figure out the durations, I read aloud the dialogue between the characters and timed myself with my cellphone's chronometer. Unfortunately, the next stories I read---William Faulkner's "A Rose for Emily" and Henry James's "Jolly Corner"---were not as simple to tag. In the case of Faulkner, the difficulty came from the fact that most paragraphs were expository; they read as descriptions (of settings, for instance, or characters' backstories) as opposed to plot advancements. Would a paragraph indicating the look of a living room account for any time in a movie? Probably not, since the living room could just be shown instantly, in a shot. The reason James's story was tricky was the abundance of Spencer Brydon's thoughts. After all, how long does a thought (or a chain of thoughts) last? More often than not, I went with my gut when tagging these works of fiction. I read Arthur Conan Doyle's *The Hound of the Baskervilles* and Toni Morrison's *The Bluest Eye*. For both of these novels, the breakup of scenes part was easy, while the assignment of time durations was not. Still, I am glad I took part in the experiment. As Erik Fredner pointed out to me: "not only is precision impossible in this context since texts are imprecise in their timing," but "precision isn't even the goal."

*Ena Alvarado is a Stanford junior from Caracas, Venezuela studying English. She may love reading and writing a little too much.*